Here's a conundrum.
Identical twins
originate from the same DNA.
So how can they turn out
so different,
even in traits that have
a significant genetic component?
For instance,
why might one twin get heart disease
at 55 while her sister runs marathons
in perfect health?
Nature versus nurture has a lot
to do with it, but a deeper related
answer can be found within
something called epigenetics.
That's the study of how DNA interacts
with the multitude
of smaller molecules
found within cells,
which can activate
and deactivate genes.
If you think of DNA as a recipe book,
those molecules are largely
what determine what gets cooked
when they aren't making any conscious
choices themselves.
Rather, their presence
and concentration
within cells makes the difference.
So how does that work?
Genes in DNA are expressed
when they're read
and transcribed into RNA,
which is translated
into proteins
by structures called ribosomes.
And proteins are much of what
determines a cell's characteristics
and function.
Epigenetic changes
can boost or interfere
with the transcription
of specific genes.
The most common way
interference happens is that DNA,
or the proteins it's wrapped around,
gets labeled
with small chemical tags.
The set of all of the chemical tags
that are attached to the genome of a
given cell is called the epigenome.
Some of these, like a methyl group,
inhibit gene expression
by derailing
the cellular transcription machinery
or causing the DNA to coil
more tightly, making it inaccessible.
The gene is still there,
but it's silent.
Boosting transcription
is essentially the opposite.
Some chemical tags
will unwind the DNA, making it easier
to transcribe, which ramps up
production of the associated protein.
Epigenetic changes can survive
cell division,
which means that they could affect
an organism for its entire life.
Sometimes that's a good thing.
Epigenetic changes
are part of normal development.
The cells in an embryo start
with one master genome.
As the cells divide,
some genes are activated and others
inhibited over time
through this epigenetic reprograming.
Some cells develop into heart cells
and others into liver cells.
Each of the approximately 200
cell types in your body
has essentially the same genome,
but its own distinct epigenome.
The epigenome also mediates
a lifelong dialog
between genes and the environment.
The chemical tags that turn genes on
and off can be influenced by factors
including diet,
chemical exposure, and medication.
The resulting epigenetic changes
can eventually lead to disease
if, for example,
they turn off a gene that makes
a tumor suppressing protein.
Environmentally induced epigenetic
changes are part of the reason
why genetically identical twins can
grow up to have very different lives.
As twins get older,
their epi genomes diverge,
affecting the way they age
and their susceptibility to disease.
Even social experiences
can cause epigenetic changes.
In one famous experiment,
when mother rats weren't attentive
enough to their pups, genes
in the babies that help them
manage stress were methylated
and turned off,
and it might not stop
with that generation.
Most epigenetic marks are erased
when egg and sperm cells are formed.
But now researchers think
that some of those imprints survive,
passing those epigenetic traits
on to the next generation.
Your mother's or your father's
experiences as a child, or choices
as adults could actually
shape your own epigenome.
But even though
epigenetic changes are sticky,
they're not necessarily permanent.
A balanced lifestyle
that includes a healthy diet,
exercise,
and avoiding exposure to contaminants
may, in the long
run, create a healthy epigenome.
It's an exciting time to be studying
this.
Scientists are just beginning
to understand how epigenetics
could explain mechanisms
of human development and aging,
as well as the origins of cancer,
heart disease,
mental illness, addiction,
and many other conditions.
Meanwhile, new genome
editing techniques
are making it much easier to identify
which epigenetic changes
really matter for health and disease.
Once we understand
how our epigenome influences
us, we might
be able to influence it to.